---
layout: post
title: My Blogging Switch to Jekyll from Flask
---

#My Blogging Switch to Jekyll from Flask
The switch was entirely motivated by Github's native hosting support for Jekyll, and catalyzed by the really pretty tutorial pages [here][1].

The cloning process was actually fairly straight-forward, with only a few hitches. I had essentially made my [Flask site][2] to do exactly what Jekyll was designed to do, that is act as a Markdown blog.

The different components that were changed in the website transition were:

* Python-Markdown to RedCarpet Markdown (Ruby)
* Jinja Templates to Liquid Templates
* Flask to Jekyll

##Python-Markdown to RedCarpet Markdown
Probably the most significant change I needed to make was to my Markdown syntax.

###Homepage Post Preview
In my Flask site, I had made a custom Markdown Preprocessor to extract a preview snippet for the homepage: [github](https://github.com/jameh/biscuitsandtea/mysite/views.py#15)

```python
class PreviewPreprocessor(Preprocessor):
    def run(self, lines):
        new_lines = []
        pre = False
        for line in lines:
            if line.startswith(r"%%%"):
                if not pre:
                    pre = True
                else:
                    pre = False
                continue

            if pre:
                new_lines.append(line)
        if not new_lines:
            return lines
        else:
            return new_lines
```

This would extract text between `%%%`, and send only that markdown code to be processed by the homepage. (I also had to write an `IgnorePercentExtension` preprocessor too though, for my post pages.)

RedCarpet (obviously) has a different way of dealing with previews. At the beginning of the .md file, there's a YAML header with key-value pairs which looks like this:

```yaml
---
layout: post
title: My Switch to Jekyll from Flask
---
```

You can use the key "excerpt" in this header to pass a paragraph to the main page for the preview. This is easier, but not quite as flexible as my previous setup. I'm also worried that if I want to extend RedCarpet, I may need to learn Ruby...

That said, I have seen some Jekyll sites use parsed html comments like `<!--preview-->` to mark where their previews start and end - which is much more flexible, and less stupid than pasting your preview to the header of your .md file.

###Images and CSS
Unfortunately, at the time of writing, the "attribute list" functionality provided [here][4] by Python-Markdown (and [here][5] by Maruku) is not available in RedCarpet. I used this extension for adding CSS id and class labels to elements in the Markdown, which can then be assigned some styles, specifically formatting and sizing. The syntax is:

```
{: #someid .someclass somekey='some value' }
```


This is particularly missing for images, as this is the way I controlled image positioning in my posts before. I hope that something comes along eventually - it is pretty crucial. There is an open [feature request][6] on RedCarpet.

##Jinja to Liquid
The syntactical difference between the two templating languages is hardly there. Both use {% raw %}`{{}}`{% endraw %} for variable replacements, both share the same "filter" syntax, {% raw %}`{{ content | safe }}`{% endraw %}, and both use the same {% raw %}`{% %}`{% endraw %} logical blocks.

The main paradigm change was the change from template *inheritance* to "snippets". In Jinja, you'd have some base template, say `base.html` that would have all the boilerplate you want on all your pages. You'd then declare in your other html files,

```jinja
{% raw %}
{% extends "base.html" %}
{% endraw %}
...
```

In Liquid, it's less nested. To get the same effect, we define a `head.html` file with the top boilerplate stuff, and a `foot.html` with the bottom boilerplate stuff, and the inheritance becomes what Liquid calls "including snippets":

```jinja
{% raw %}
{% include head.html %}
...
{% include foot.html %}
{% endraw %}
```

In my opinion, Liquid got this one right. Despite their undeniable usefulness and ubiquity, trees are just a bother to think about, especially when their job can be accomplished with concise "flat" logic (cf. recursion vs. iteration).

## Flask to Jekyll
You can compare the file trees of the two approaches on the respective Github pages: [Flask][2], [Jekyll][3]. They are not too different from one another; both have a ``markdown`` or ``_posts`` folder for the markdown files, ``templates`` folders, ``media``, and ``static`` folders.

The nice thing that Liquid has to offer for bloggers is that making a new page with a url is as easy as adding a folder and your html or markdown template. This is the layout of my "about" page:

```
about/
    index.md
```

damn sexy, right? This automatically generates the index.html from the markdown template, and serves from ``{% raw %}{{ site.baseurl }}{% endraw %}/about/`` page. In Flask, this involved editing the Python in ``views.py``, defining a new function.

## Overall
I'm pretty happy with the setup, but I hope that I won't need to dig too much into Ruby in the future to deal with extending Jekyll's functionality. Specifically, I need to find an attribute list extension for RedCarpet

[1]: https://jekyllrb.com/docs/home
[2]: https://github.com/jameh/biscuitsandtea
[3]: https://github.com/jameh/jameh.github.io
[4]: http://pythonhosted.org/Markdown/extensions/attr_list.html
[5]: http://maruku.rubyforge.org/proposal.html#attribute_lists
[6]: https://github.com/vmg/redcarpet/issues/306
